Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV
bronchiolitis,
is one of the most common causes of lower
respiratory distress in infants.
And as a respiratory therapist, your
ability to recognize severity
early is critical.
In this lesson, we're focusing on how RSV
affects the
small airways, what that looks like
clinically,
and how to make real-time decisions at the
bedside.
RSV primarily targets the bronchioles,
causing inflammation,
edema, and increased mucus production.
Because infants already have very small
airways, even slight swelling
can significantly increase resistance.
This leads to air trapping,
hyperinflation,
and increased work of breathing.
Think cause-right pointing arrow effect.
Viral infection leads to airway swelling
and mucus plugging, which
leads to obstruction, which leads to poor
ventilation,
and increased respiratory effort.
Clinically, these patients often present
with tachypnea,
nasal flaring, retractions, and diffused
crackles
or wheezing.
One key difference from asthma is that
wheezing is not always the dominant finding.
Crackles from mucus and airway collapse
are very common.
From an RT perspective, your priority is
not just identifying
RSV.
It's determining how sick the patient is.
Ask yourself, is the patient maintaining
oxygenation?
Are they moving air effectively?
Are they fatiguing?
Diagnostics are often clinical, but pulse
oximetry is essential.
ABGs are not routine unless the patient is
worsening.
A rising carbon dioxide, just like an
asthma,
is a late and dangerous sign.
Management is mostly supportive.
Oxygen therapy is the first line
intervention.
Nasal suctioning is critical.
This is one of the few conditions where
secretion removal can dramatically improve ventilation.
High flow nasal cannula may be used to
reduce work of breathing and improve
oxygenation.
Unlike asthma, bronchodilators and
steroids are not routinely effective.
So treatment decisions should be based on
patient response, not
habit.
Red flags include apnea, poor feeding,
lethargy, worsening retractions, and
declining oxygen
saturation despite support.
These patients may require escalation to
CPAP or mechanical ventilation.
Here's your board prep takeaway.
RSV bronchiolitis is a supportive care
disease.
Oxygen, suctioning, and monitoring are
your
core interventions, not bronchodilators.
And your RT clinical pearl, always
reassess work of breathing
and mental status.
A tired infant who looks quieter is not
improving.
They may be failing.
By the end of this lesson, you should be
able
to connect the pathophysiology of RSV to
what you see at the bedside and
make confident board-level clinical
decisions.